- Phyles
It seems Diamond Age is not so far away by now. Emerging are the phyles, tribes of ideas, some social democratic, some autocratic. Welcome to europe candaduu.
Also, you can loose your nation and citizenship, if you turn to other ideas. Become a communist and you become a north korean or venezuelian, become a djihadi and you are a ISIL or Saudi Arabia citizen. Be a bleeding heart bug liberal- and you are a Californian or Israeli. Maybe this is where we are going.
It would be interesting to see, the inter-phyle interaction. Today, the amish phyle and the californian phyle came to a trading aggreement, where upon the Californian phyle would protect the Amish phyle in return for a scholarship on californian schools for the brightest of the amish decendants.

I won't bet against geography - there is a billion years of evolution and it's easier to find someone. Tragedy of Syria and war


- electric home rings will be USB
All my lights at home are )well Lloyd) are LEDs
Drawing ridiculously less power - but with expensive transformers between 240v 50a power circuit and then. All they need is much less power - and 5v 2a is pemty - as are my mobile devices. More and more power will fall on toy he default standard


- data loss insurance
As more and more software has kinetic effect (hurts people) and as more virtual world have genuine harm (celebrity photos, ransomware, swift gateway hacks) people will want to hold software manufacturers liable
No warranty will die off
But insurance will come in - boiler manufacturer insurance

Lessons from the theRAC-25
http://sunnyday.mit.edu/papers/therac.pdf

- data rights - individuals data rights and licensing of data - a new form of GPL?? Individually identifiable data belongs to me and must be treated with care. It can only be onwards used or annotated if I consent. We presume open consent - that is any agreement involving data about or generated by me or caused by me passing through, interacting with of inferred by data, is owned by me and is presumed open and carries that open into other areas



- data training sets - is this a picture of a cat? Is this language racially offensive? Is this Pepsi advert racially offensive? There is a wealth of human decisions that can be used to train computer ML but getting paid for that data ? The Ts and Cs for google and Facebook need to change (and they won't voluntarily obviously)

A new GPL - 

- open source remains great because it reflects economic reality and greatest benefit for all. The film with Matt Damon and the orbiting space station. We just won't accept that situation, especially when the fix is one line of code or one license on all data? 

- concentrate on the money not the scale 
https://jacquesmattheij.com/does-it-scale-who-caresn

- right to repair
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=14074894
Hard to prove when software and hardware interact
MOT ? 
After market principles - in interests of competionnand healthy reverse engineering we want to encourage an after sales market
However we want to ensure that the standards of the after sales market is at least as stringent as the OEM market. 
So if a part of to be replaced, it can be done without the oem being part of the chain, but their methods tools and signatures must be available to the after market.

(We treat software signing etc as a specialised wrench. It's fine to have a special wrench, but you must make its specs available to the after market at reasonable cost)



- sharing data - open data
My Tesco habits must be made public to licensed public providers unless I sign out - so NHS researchers can see if I go to gym and eat right? 


- lost the themes in manual here and discuss them and cross ref - so talk centralised logging and scale here 

- too much or not enough innovation
Economic innovation is basically energy use (Solow x). So right now we are very energy efficient (can talk to almost any human anywhere on planet) but also using carbon sources - we don't have sustainable energy

More innovation - but it's hard. There are two major drivers of innovation and hence productivity growth in the 21 C - software and fusion. Fusion is self explanatory. Software is really the heart of the book but with widespreasd software literacy we will expect to see a change in corprorate and governmental structures on the same order as we saw as literacy spread throughout renaissance medieval Europe - fundamental. When combined with new power forms we should expect amazing things

James watt not only invented a better steam engine, but he has to invent carbon copy paper in order to make his literate company more efficient.

Someday we shall see the like again. 

- basic Trump thesis is extreme form of book great stagnation- we were promised flying cars and we got 149 characters 
Golden gate before / it's all getting worse

Or

How hard is it to keep a hospital clean?

As hard as is to maintain security

All a trade off 

AI and productivity 
Google is a consumer advert company where is the enterprise AI? 


- will aliens kill  us all and why is that relevant?
Unlikely because the technology advances necessary indicate a society that survives a very long time. That means they develop the means to wipe themselves out but also don't do so - which means they develop the social mechanisms to regulate warlike instincts.

Those social mechanism are described by me a s "better organisations" - like democracy, and capitalism

So the more likely a civilisation is to have tech to cross the stars the more likely they are to not use that tech for war, because they need to not be at war with themselves

So this book is about our search for a better way to run the world - better organisations and better inter-nation (another organisation) co operation

Basically if we live in peace, innovate 

First mannupneverest quote:
It's not that we do mountain mountain climbing because we love the danger it's that it is in an environment that will kill you if you let it.

Space and the future are environments that will kill us if we let it.  We need to prepare at base camps



Algorithms and fitness functions
- googles fitness function is relevance search result (i.e. Time before returning to search)
- Facebook is maybe social engagement - time spent reading
- better ones might be time spent around genuine friends, and local friends (community building)

But Kathy O'Neill book shows how fitness functions firstly need to exist and second must be chosen with societies goals

We must enforce openness - why literacy is a good analogy
We do  it allow Kafka Raquel situations if not being allowed to read a law

We need politics that says this is necessary despite the weight of commercial confidence 

https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=14490701
Google itself is a fitness function! 


New government
Tim oreilly wife says government is vastness ocean and politics is just the waves on top

We are seeing more and more politics turning to GDS style - but this is where we need three important things 

- clear definition of the goal (fitness function)
  (Dog whistle, undeserving poor etc)
   Also issues around CV not recognising black women
   
- openness and auditability of data inputs, algorithm etc

- legal framework - government by what works. The blairite phrase

These are immensely difficult - and especially the first,


- different agents in an economy / world
Real market 
Finsicialisation

Government vs trade unions is basically a civil war amount govenrmyn as trade unions are a part of the government role


- Coase thoughts
http://howonlee.github.io/2017/05/30/Poking-20At-20Causation2c.html

AI back propagation in CO's Sian analysis

Organisations as a whole - building NASA was as much a challenge as building gimbled rocket engines.  The ability for five thousand people to work to one goal is hard to create and sustain - cf Saturn car project

Costs will be reduced but hard to imagine them being zeroed - an orgnisation has a controlling kind aspect to it that wholst bureaucratic is also necessary and not amenable to fitness functions 

- one global market
AI apps looking for our wants in a globally transparent market 


Securitisation and financialisation
These are global problems - but Facebook and google are examples of securitisation of internet - why the hell should I send my baby photos to San Francisco to get them seen by my mother in law ten miles away?

- humans dependnat on technology for millions of years
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/04/professor-caveman/517815/

The cutting edge of a flint - we started to develop brains that needed more calories than our claws could get - we would not have survived if stone and fire had been removed - and society and civilisation would have starved.  Formmilkions of years humans have been on this symbiotic rocket ride.  Where we are now is nothing new. Just, faster. 


- new finacialisation
Ok so we have finacilisation - which massively benefitted few. What we want is a new framework that allows the benefits to be more widely spread. For me that means not regulations that pretend they can make access to bonds safer (cf BRRD and banco populare and monte xxx - Spanish and Italian banks in trouble - one was basically wiped out officially and the bond holders got squat, the other Italian has had its bonds sold to retail investors so the impact will be deep - what we need is a more active bond maket with funds and retail investment vehicles so the impact is lessened)

In other words - everyone has access to markets the rich have. This avoids the bigger fincialisation issues.  The other main issue we saw in the crash was incorrect valuations. Come on. That's transparency and opennness.  Look at RECAP - report evaluate and compare alternative prices. This is if you offer for sale you provide a machine language report allowing people to compare prices - no matter how complex the instrument.


- emergent order / invisible hand
The feedback mechanism, the glue, is free (unfettered) pricing mechanism - it allows each player to determine if they are providing value to the rest of the chain.

Distoriationninnpricing are therefore bad

- global governance is needed before global political union - and if we do that, do we need global political union? Issues of harmonisation and governance and freedom.

So let's look at geo engineering or crispr germline editing. If I spray sulphur into the upper atmosphere it alters the climate globally.  I could take my small country and launch a balloon and soon people might notice.  Would that be a case for bombin? 

The UN is likely to be the place to discuss bombing my little country. But what if people think it's a good idea - but disagree on the setting for the thermostat? What is the right forum to decide that

Some of these are so extreme that out of band discussions like the UN security forum seem too d places. But there are only 5 members. This issue seems so important that other countries will want a say.  And that means wider UN. And now we have to enforce those agreements - to get countries often actually at war with each other to agree to be bound by the same rules.

Brexit has shown that this is really really difficult. European harmonisation is a great achievement - see Canadian European trade agreement on mobile number portability.

But is that too low level, too detailed? 

And now corporate governance - let's look at open source governance as another model.

The disadvantage to real life is hard to move allegiances. Perhaps how you vote whsoukd determine how you are affected? 


Bruce schneir 
Because there are currently no liabilities for lousy software and no regulations mandating secure software, the market rewards software that's fast and cheap at the expense of good. 

How do we chnage that ? Insurance model, suing those who do it badly? How sue Microsoft? Move to layered operating systems - hardened, and much less friendly.

But getting there? The internet of things needs this level of security. EU law recently published recommendations on end to end security. So the EU (currently the world's most uptodate regulatory body of note) is pushing in right direction.  But time to market in the internet of things is vital - and until we start to see things like "ransomware proof guarantees like kite marks" we will be in trouble.

And I don't want to be that software developer. Do I ?

What will that environment look like? 

Frankly I think it will look like this - I don't have editorial reviews for my emails. Yet as a standard office worked I write on average enough words in mail to fill a normal novel.

My writing is for me personally. And as a manager my coding is quite a lot of the time for me personally so. Sometimes I use my coding to collect data or inform myself. And as it's just my code the standards do not have to be high.

That's the organisation around making a product. The meetings, the data collection etc

Now if we have to put more process, more clean room, more assurance in place, then ok.  We simply have to deal with traceability - who write this code and when. Did it get written and tested 

All of this is extractable from the code. NASA approaches may focus on process but they are proven and tested through the code. 

So our assurances need to be around verifying the tests around a code based.

This is achievable 


Eu 
draft proposal on end2end encryption 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-%2F%2FEP%2F%2FNONSGML%2BCOMPARL%2BPE-606.011%2B01%2BDOC%2BPDF%2BV0%2F%2FEN


Is social media destroying democracy?
We are seeing sources if news (and bias) coming from elsewhere than mainstream newspapers - or rather its newspapers where anyone can insert their editorial onnyiur paper.

And is that a problem? How to measure news sources? 


Read insights of pentester
https://0x00sec.org/t/shared-thoughts-after-6-years-in-pentesting/2492

- the shape of workers contracts
Increasingly we see hotels where the brand licenses to the building owners which licenses to hotel runner which licenses food service and security and so on
Gig economy

What is needed, much like transparency in food chain and manufacturing chain, and the shares - is beneficial owner and controlling mind 

- who is responsible 

- deep learning: weakness and strength is the training. That there is no real way to interrogate the model for a deterministic reason why it arrived at the answe.

But analysis of humans is that we make decisions before conscious mind is aware- that is it seems the emotions are trained as young and there is then a conscious awareness layer that can detect  dissonance 

Cf the face recognition that did not see black woman

So next development for deep learning is a consistency and coherence layer. 

Make a human kit

