=================
Software Literacy
=================

I'm standing in a cavernous room underneath a bustling, noisy pub in
London's Covent Garden.  It was a fine Summers day and the evening is
sharply cooking.

I look around at the 90-odd developers, graduates and entrepreneurs in
the room, and, as I have been persuaded to sponsor this meeting, now
all I have to do is give a quick speech.

I never quite know what to do for these sort of speeches - so I decide
to give a history lesson. Yes. A history lesson. Gripping stuff, some
were even rolling their eyes in excitement.

It's a good one though. You see, in 1454, Johannes Gutenberg printed
the first of his Bibles using movable type - and ushered in a new era
of literacy and communication. Printing books was now orders of
magnitude cheaper, and there was an explosion of publishing. The
number of published books leapt from an estimated 30,000 books *in all
of Europe in 1450* to 12 million books by 1500.  Think about that. A
decent sized library today, in many large towns in England will have
30,000 books.  More than were in the whole of Europe before the
printing press. [#]_

Within a generation literacy in Western Europe had leapt from under 2%
to well over 20% - and it changed everything. Martin Luther was able
to nail a piece of paper to a church door and expect most members of
the middle-class congregation to simply read it, not have it read to
them by clergy. Books on mathematics and navigation enabled the
training of middle-class merchantmen who would then dare, only 40
years later, to cross the Atlantic.

Literacy en mass changed the course of human history and gave a tiny
corner Eurasia some huge advantages the effects of which are only just
wearing off five centuries later.

Before people wandered off to the bar I decided to let them know why
they were getting my best Simon Scharma impression.

Because, in my view, and remember they were eating my sausage rolls,
so that counts, in my view we are entering the age of a new form of
literacy - *software literacy.*

Even in the 15th century, nations, companies and guilds and churches
competed, and ran international concerns. But somewhere between
Gutenberg's Bible and Luther's 95 Theses these companies changed. Not
with business process re-engineering, or total quality circles - but
changed like leaving the water and walking on land changed. I have no
idea how to quantify the advantages a company whose staff can all read
and write will have over a company whose staff are illiterate. It's
not one of lower labour cost, or better marketing, it's something
else...Deep in our bones we *know* that literacy changes everything.
Its so built into us and into everyone we know that we cannot imagine
a world where we cannot read or write.

Anyway, you, like the poor people wanting to get to the bar, can see
where I am taking this. The ability to marshal knowledge, to code and
compile and compute, the natural inclination to arrange the world so
it can be iterated over, the ability to turn a business from a
medieval scriptorium into an automated system is software literacy.

The final shape of a software literate company is probably unguessable
to us, in the same way that an airports departures board was
unguessable to Pope Pius II, or that a major newspaper run by
illiterate editors will look and work nothing like the Washington
Post. But we can be sure they are coming. And we can make sensible
predictions about what they will and won't be.

And so, as the Meetup wanders back to the bar slightly shocked, we
wander back to our theme.

.. sidebar:: 

It is worth noting that about 50,000 years before Gutenberg, humans
invented another world changing technology - a spoken language.  It
became possible to communicate abstract ideas. Beyond "danger" we could achieve "danger from tiger tomorrow" - and our brains evolved in step with our language to cope.  

To look at it another way - for 50,000 years we coded up one single
release of a single parser / interpreter - the human brain.  The written word became a hard drive to store code on, and Gutenberg invented distributed networking.

It's 


The software literate company, and the programmable company
-----------------------------------------------------------

Software literacy for a company does not mean that it just hires a lot
of programmers, and calls the job done.  That's been happening for a
long time and yet few companies manage to evolve.  I am hoping to
describe in this book a vision of a company *that does not exist yet*.
A truly literate company, in a world of other software literate
companies.  We cannot know for sure the shape such companies will
take - they will jostle and change in a complex dance of evolution,
but we can look at both positive and negative data we have today - how
companies have failed to act in a sane / literate manner, and how some
fundamentals of software literacy are shining thru and will be
unavoidable in the future.



.. figure:: /_static/all-the-presidents-men.png
   :width: 75%

   When I speak of a literate company, please keep this film in mind.

'All the President's Men' is one of my favourite films, engrossing and
suspenseful.  And it also portrays life in a deeply literate company.

I will take a leap and argue that the Washington Post under Ben
Bradlee was the epitome of a (non-software) literate company.  It had
well trained professionals, clear ethical standards, clear business
processes and clear processes for ensuring that its literate output
met their standards. Editors and copy-sub-editors and so on.  Oh, and
cash-flow. That helped a lot.

I suggest that even companies like tech-behemoth Google are not really
software literate ... yet. But the clues are there. In the excellent
SRE book (link) author (link) the "founder" of SRE in Google, defines
SRE as "SRE is what happens when you ask a software engineer to design
an operations team".  As we go forward we shall find the software
literate companies are what happens when software engineers design
(found, run, populate and evolve) companies.  The flush of unicorns
today in Silicon Valley are nearly software literate - the effort of
founding a company is so huge that it's hard to believe that what
results is what a software engineer would design. Things get missed.
But each generation of companies will steal from previous until the
majority of a company is what would be designed.

Does it make a difference - well let's compare the old "knowledge
company" and the new. In 2012 `Google` had a revenue of $50bn and a
workforce of 40,000 - whereas the finance house `Barclays
International` also had a revenue of $50bn, but a far larger workforce
of 120,000.  Fast-forward to 2016 and `Google` has grown to $89bn and
70,000 people.  In the same year of 2016, `Bank Of America` posted
revenues of $89bn, and a workforce of over 200,000 people.  There are
many caveats comparing these numbers, but all the firms involved are
resolutely "knowledge-based" - the core processes of the firms do not
involve smelting iron ore or manufacturing cars.  And yet `Google`
carries 2/3 less humans for same revenue at each stage.  One of them
has used software in a markedly different manner.

One of them has become more *software literate*.

Software literacy will become part of the core fabric because software
is core to why the world is changing - because software allows us to
more precisely express and then share the models in our heads.  So if
my model in my head says that the life of a child crossing the road is
more valuable than the driver of a Tesla, then perhaps one day I will
vote on a software pull request ...

Follow the Literate
-------------------

When I started in the Internet world the truism then was 'follow the
young'.  Young people then were drinking in pubs (of course) but using
digital cameras to record the night, and uploading the pictures to a
web page later that evening so everyone could see the next morning.
And they did so listening to MP3s played out of the PCs speakers.
Which in 1995 was *prescient*.

But it turned out that was not what young people were doing.  It was
what softeare literate young people with access to fixed line internet
were doing.

The rule should have been, and still is, if you want to understand how
software is eating the world, follow the software literate person - a
company built by a literate person full of other literate people will
look different to anything else before.


Why are companies big or small?
-------------------------------

This might seem a silly question, obviously the more successful
companies get bigger.  But that means you have to share the loot with
more people - so if you could run a company completely automatedly,
you would so you would not share the revenue with any one.  So the
extra people must be there for a good reason.  But you would not add
*more* people than needed.  That would cut the amount of loot to go
round.  So there must be counter-veiling forces, pushing and pulling
for hiring or reducing people.

The British Mid-Century Economist Roald Coase came up with a *theory of
the firm* to explain this struggle - that a firm size (number of
employees) is an equilibrium between getting your work done through
external contracts, and getting the work done internally by employees.

Coase's Theory of the Firm says that the *transaction costs* of each
(ie finding a external provider, verifying they are secure, can meet
your needs, versus training up a new employee) determine the total
cost of providing a service, and so determine whether it is better to
hire a new employee rather than looking out for a contract provider.

So when we look at Google v Barclays we can *intuit* that the 2/3 of
the old style firm is making up for the missing automation.  And that
about 1/3 of the old firm is then a combination of people not yet
automated away and people changing the firm (ie adding new automation
to do new parts of the job).

Now of course, software and the internet is changing these transaction
costs, and so changing the equilibrium point of firms sizes.  And as
firm sizes change, they change governance structures as well.  The
trend looks to be *smaller*.  But to really take advantage of Coase's
theory, a firm needs to be more than automated, it needs to be
*programmable*.



.. ::

  Copernicus principle and democracy 
   -----------------------------------

  see talking politics but if we see end of our short mass participation
  democracy - what will replace it? remember electronic voting cannot
  work so the easy answer is wrong

  searching for a world where we have different models but models are
  review-able. models can be represented in code. and if we tell our
  agent what we want (Nobel prize win) we get optimal outcomes

  start to smell a programmable company and programmable society where
  our wants are explicit and modelled and actions review-able - and best
  interests are kept (mid term democracy) - and moop exists to help us
  deal with it (see slabscsoe drugs to stop worrying)

  (can expand but is seperate section)

Just what is a programmable company?
------------------------------------

.. figure:: /_static/portrait_of_merchant_jan_gossaert.png
   :width: 75%

   A dutch 16th century trader pointing at his accounts books
   Jan Gossaert (Washington National Gallery)
   
The 16th Century Trader shown above is writing in an accounting book,
and has hanging behind him his accounts for the past venture.  As a
portrait like this would be outrageously expensive, and so it is is a
good example of how proud rich merchants were of their new "system" -
accounting. Yes, 500 years ago, accountants were cool.  It was cool
because it was a way to control companies in a *very nearly*
programmatic way.  By setting limits to how subordinates could behave
by setting budgets, and by being able to monitor how successful they
were through budgets, a company could be controlled, or perhaps I
should say *programmed* to behave in certain ways. Companies could be controlled by telling people what to do, but by setting and altering budgets, they could be (in a limited sense) programmed. They were and are a slow form of AI [#stross1]_ 



By the industrial revolution accounting had become globally accepted
and slowly standardised, and after the 1950s Management Accounting had
been invented / popularised by consultants like Bain, but now Software is
bridging the physical world and the virtual more granular than
previously.

And this is my definition of a programmable company - where all
processes are visible in the virtual world - where the levers can be
pulled at a more granular level, and feedback controlled more
precisely, through software.  This is not *entirely* about replacing
people with robots.  Years ago as a student I worked as a Warehouse
Picker, ripping a perforated sheet off a printer, walking up and down
aisles filling crates and loading crates onto lorries to be shipped
out.  If the Software told me to load 6 bottles of Johnny Walker,
that's what I did.  I may have been slow, surly and occasionally
hungover, but I was entirely programmable.  Think of me as a student
Marvin the Paranoid Android, with a similar pain in my diodes down the
left side

I expect warehouse robots *have* now replaced my erstwhile colleagues, but
they are no more programmable than we were. But the marketing
department for the giant Distillery firm had employees to run their
recruitment drives, had employees to complete payroll, had employees
to sort out our shifts and employees to decide what adverts to send to
what companies to sell their services.

All of those were not programmable jobs back in my student days
(sometime after Napoleon's exile) - but many have become so today.
Payroll has been automated for a long time, but Software-as-a-Service
companies offer end to end recruitment services that can be turned on
or off as easily as when I ripped a A4 sheet of perforated paper.
SaaS companies offer mobile apps that let people swap their shifts
around, and still meet local working time regulations, and A/B testing
has fundamentally moved advertising and marketing away from "brilliant
creative endeavours" and into "try this and measure its affect".
Funnel optimisation is a real thing.

So automation is eating away at pretty much everything. Surely at some
point we can *automate all the things*, and have a gazillion dollar
company run by one woman part-time?


It is a trope that it is much cheaper to start a Start-up now than in
the early 2000s.  But it is cheaper to *run* a company of almost any
size if it is automated.  The amount that companies are / will spend
on "Robot Process Automation" (ie screen scraping and replacing back
office staff) is a major growth area today.

But automating processes is not the whole story for a programmable company.
There seem to be four components - trust-able data, models / what if planning,
automation of processes, good governance.

What aspects of Coasian Transaction Costs are being changed by software?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

For me the single biggest transaction cost left is *data management*.
No this is not "stick it on a disk", but data about data.  What data do we have,
what does it mean, who produced it, when, how does that data fit into our models
and suddenly there is a *lot* of work involved.

There are signs this matters because Chief Information Officers
regulalrly sit on company boards - as a sign that at board level no
one has any reliable data and does not know what is going on and
therefore creates a high level post to just sort it out.

In short the cost of *trusting* data is one of the biggest single transaction
costs between using internal employees and internal data sources and using external (cheaper) data sources.

Data that is generated from inside the company is implicitly trusted
(even perhaps if it should not - see later points on fake news and
fake project management), but data from outside the company needs
filtering, transforming etc.  However the impact of external *ledgers*
(with the Blockchain as the poster boy ledger) will change what can be
trusted.

Walmart and Tesco are sometimes described as companies only possible
after the creation of the Relational Database - they built internally
trustable supply chains - but if that supply chain is now placed on a
Blockchain ledger - If you can see the supply chain from factory to
shop, for every SKU in your shop, then the vast web of databases and
processes Walmart (or Amazon) has built are ... legacy.

Similarly encryption technologies, and zero-knowledge encryption
especially, will start to impact on where data can be stored and
manipulated.  Trusting a third party to hold your data, is a big cost
(unless of course you are an individual in which case Google and
Facebook and the advertising industry just hoover it up relentlessly,
... ranting again.  Look its hard to read I know but just imagine what
its like to be in my head.  I have this stuff going on all the time.)

You see, encrypting your data and then working on it map-reduce style
on rented machines and re-encrypting it when finished is likely to be
a growth model.

Additionally the willingness to outsource wholesale services to SaaS
companies shows that data management is loosely held. (I mean the
timesheets and payrolls of employees is not only sensitive but
competitively useful, but hardly any company does this in-house
anymore.)

The *serverless* software model has some compelling financial and
flexibility arguments.

As data, and more importantly meta-data is managed at a first class
level in companies we shall see a huge shift in what can be offloaded,
outsourced etc.

Software applied to Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There is a truism in software engineering - its better to have few
simple data structures and complex operations on them, then many
complex data structures and few operations.

.. pull-quote::

   (have the Brooks quote on show me your data model)

Having got data under control, companies need to start managing their *processes*.

You would be amazed at how much duplication of work and processing,
how much different understandings of what a piece of data is or means
goes on inside every large corporation.

Let me give you a quick example.  Actually 2 examples.

(I *love* Monzo. They are a challenger bank. 
Banking. New banks, the Monzo Beta issue.)

So even if we have data under control, the messy evolved system
internally to a company

Director Hazing
---------------

Large companies have evolved *horrific* internal processes.  Just as
Monzo learnt, I hope, somethings need extra checks.  Now Hopefully
Monzo has written tests that prevent them sending changed statements.
Automated tests.

But that is extra grist. A new sign off. After many years, (and not
enough automation of sign offs and checks!) the system just becomes
"what we have always done" and usually someone tries to get a Big
Important Consultancy in to fix it which of course means a crazier,
overly configureable system with no *opinions* and now no one understands it.

In other words internal processes become really messy relly quickly.

And companies need internal middle management that understand how to get things done in that mess. So they hire talented, clever people at middle management level (in the US model this is the Director level).  And what every new Director
in every major company discovers is that their first six months are *hell*.

Whereas signing off payroll or ordering new pencils or agreeing a budget was something your boss did, now you have to learn how to do it - and that means learning that "the ARCP system needs a Green approval in the TENDER system before you can get the PMO to OK the release of funds for NCD".

And this happens hundreds of times a day.  You either learn to swim,
or you sink - fast.  Those who swim are now in line for the real
tournament to the top.

I call this Director Hazing.  The total mind-fuck that learning
pointless systems trivia unique to one company, so that you can simply
*function*.  And doing it at a hundred decisions a day speed.
And because the older hands had to do it, they are quite
happy to see the younglings go through the same pain. It did them good afterall.

But, is the skill to be able to manually make hundreds of tiny actions  a day,
to navigate the crazy internal systems, to manage the hundreds of people you have, is that *necessary* or is that contingent on the lack of automation?

Are the skills Director Hazing selects for, the skills a Programmable Company needs?  


Finally, if we have a programmable company it can do an amazing thing.
Controlling a company through accountancy and budgets was
impressive. It allowed empirical testing of ideas (give this section
this much budget and see what happens)

But it lacked ... predictive capabilities.

But if you have a programmable company, where the processes are
explicit in code, then you also have a *modellable* company.  One that
can have its code brought up in a safe environment, and run against
different scenarios and tested for failures - and optimisations.

This does already happen - integration tests of systems perform
what-if analysis on systems (just like what Knight Capital did not
do).  But testing environments look for failures.  New modelling
environments will look for optimisations.

And optimisations may not meet the needs or wants of the people in the
company.  For example shift patterns in places like Starbucks have
been seeing "optimisation", and leading to issues like people being
given 3 hours in the morning and then told to leave (unpaid) for a few
hours then get a few hours in the afternoon.  This of course plays
havoc with any real persons life.  It has seen a lot of push back.

And that push back, that *political decision* to not do an optimised
change, to not follow the A/B test down a path, that is governance.
That is how does a programmable company, that can run itself without
human decision making, and that can through modelling, change itself,
how does that company change in ways that benefit us. By having a
controlling mind, that decides which changes are good or bad.

And this last is the essence of Uber, AirBnB, Facebook and google -
how they have affected our world and how regulations are trying to
steer that affect.


It is subtle in some cases this regulatory arbitrage. For example the nightmare videos on YouTube have two issues - 1. as YouTube avoids being a publisher it is not responsible for content - but if it was responsible it would have to find ways to curate the content.

2. yes it may not be possible to automatically review the content, the copyright laws may not be enforceable at that scale (dubious) - but frankly that's just a failure of business model not a technical hurdle.

Nothing stops someone putting their own videos on line - YouTube simply aggregates and collects rent





What about landscape - what are other companies doing.
------------------------------------------------------

(Notes on landscaping)


.. pull-quote::

  So we now have a couple of tools that will be useful in working out
  not only that software is eating the world, but what size and shape
  will the meals be.

Literate companies will be Lisp like - able to rewrite the virtual data that
represents their real-world actions, but also able to treat their
real-world actions as re-writable too. It was obvious how to make a
student warehouse picker change what he was doing programmatically. It
was less obvious how to make the head of marketing do so.  A/B testing
was the answer - or rather metrics were.



Fake News and Fake Project Management
-------------------------------------

The whole programmable company thing has two needs - it needs a body
(a corps or corporation) that does as it is told, and there has to be
a controlling mind. That controlling mind is the company governance.
At the moment it is a dictatorship of epic proportions. The CEO says
jump, 20,00 people say how high. But as more and more of us shift into
being programmed (like warehouse pickers or Marketing Directors) there
will be more demand to have influence over that controlling mind.

 When a company had barely accounting, and time between command and
affect was measured in time it took a ship to sail, company employees
had much autonomy.  This autonomy has been shrinking and shrinking,
till many employees are merely robots, ripping off perforated paper.
As this hits the middle class, middle management, then history tells
us middle classes demand representation at the top.  Demand democracy
in corporations.

I conjecture that we shall see more and more skilled people, the ones
who are usually "changing the company" will jump ship and run their
own smaller service providers.  But this kind of is happening as many
contractors will say.  But it is still a command and control
relationship. Smaller companies, with smaller transaction costs.



The programmable company
------------------------

For almost everything a company or organisation does a second time,
that can be automated or co-ordinated via software.  A company will
become a programmable entity.  Most if not all effort that goes into
today's software projects, goes not into creating new business logic,
but into finding the data, massaging it, guaranteeing it, handling
exceptions, and fitting into the rest of the businesses weird ways.

But a programmable company, that has robust exception handling, that
has open standards that are easy to fit into, that has trustable data,
is something else.  At a certain point, changing a company becomes a
matter of changing code.

What is a firm? A collection of processes, the handling of exceptions,
the culture? the human decision making?

There are 2 parts - running the company, and changing the company
Where BAU does not really involve human decision making we can see
automtion drop costs and increase speeds.

Trustable processes
-------------------

There is a lot of work on getting processes 'into the cloud' Putting
data up there securely, Future issues will include not leaking
competitive information Lots of work on Robot process automation.



Trusting data and firm size
---------------------------

I think there is another interesting way to look at Coase firm size -
its to do with the cost of *trusting data*.  If data is published
internally, or from a *trusted third party* (lets say Reuters) there
is a limited amount of double checking needed.  Rumour is aproblem in
all companies, but Fake News is not. But with smaller and smaller
companies, the cost of finding and *trusting* data increases.

The fight against fake news is going to be a long defining one in
years to come.  The most obvious way is simply to revert back to the
old saw "You can have your own opnion, but not your own facts". The
KGB lead approach to destroying this is to put so many fake facts, so
much chaff, that people just reinforce their own biases.  SOme method
to validate real geniuine facts against fake facts is within reach.
We can see how cameras could sign images, how articles published could
be cryptographically signed and stored, how facts marked up in the
text.

ANd so how news aggregators (sorry advertising companies) like Google
and Facebook could use that to mark fake news as such.

SOme method to validate inferences from a *selection* of facts.  Well.
Thats harder. Hell, Human Politics might be defined as that problem.

As such the current privacy, GDPR world is not merely a lefy liberal
problem. It is a major factor in form size, market efficency and the
underlying fundamentals of

How do I know - well, as a software literate person, its just obvious.



New Project Management
----------------------

Is fake news really a problem inside companies. Let me tell you a
story. Names have been changed to protect the guilty

Project - codebase begins, insufficiency for purpose, no one admitting
to it because if so then get fired.  The project management process
allowed for ... lies. Yes it passes, kind of.  any outside scrutiny-
day by a news reporter - would trivially see a problem. But no the
fake news carries on up

size makes this harder simply because at each step the ability to take
time and challenge fake news is harder - and made worse by the culture
of productivity/ hazing of directors

Director Hazing 
- grows people who are good at chaos
- not convinced that is needed - 120 junior doctor hours 
- 


so we need automated helpnto dosciver fake news in our own project reporting

and that means trusting / managing the code 


this inefficient is argued it is what brought down soviet - what all
doctoaros suffer from (see saudi air force) - and we love it in our
own companies??




We are already seeing calls for the software industry to regulate
itself, on privacy, on deals with repressive regiemes.  The answer is
not as simple as coders all being nice people.  But society needs to
regulate and also accept change.  We shall see that in section 2.

But companies, governments and organisations of every stripe, will
need to adapt to a new set of technologies that have a grain, a
direction of travel, ... a tidal force.  Those techologies are here
now, and our old organisational structures are no longer sufficent.

Lets look at it this way - Facebook, if it took all 1.5 BILLION users
and moved to a new land mass would be the worlds largest
country. Ever.

And it would be the least democratic. Ever. A one man dictatorship. No
law courts, no police, no constitution.  Nada.  And yet every Facebook
app-using citizen would have more daily contact (what 3 hours a day?)
with its "government" than they ever had with their proper
governments.

Each day we see some new controversy, YouTube failing to police its
comments section against paedophiles, (find more examples).  This is
not because Facebook is inherently evil, but because we are moving our
lives online - and *some* people moving online *are* inherently
evil. [#]_

So companies, governments, organisations, the structures we all spend
so much of our lives working within, need to change to get the best
out of the new technologial opportunity we face.

Because it could be a golden future for humanity.  Honest.


.. [#]:: OK, you might need to know a tiny bit about my political
      stance, which can be described as nice fluffy Euro-liberal until
      we look at Child Protection and I take a stance that makes
      Gengis Khan look like a big softie.  Anyway the important
      takeaway for this book is individual equality and market-led
      price discovery.

(more governace)



Governance and Software
================================

.. pull-quote::

  "Writing is nature’s way of showing us how sloppy our thinking is."
  Leslie Lamport

Writing down software shows you how sloppy your thinking was about the job in hand.

I very happily recounted my "Literacy started with the printing press,
software literacy starts with the Internet" meme in the last chapter.
I was rather proud of my little self, right up until I attended
`Sprint 16` the UK Government's annual conference on tech and software
and government.  And the Minister for the Cabinet Office stood up and
gave a keynote that was basically the speech I gave so many years
prior in a London pub basement.

Nothing stops you feeling smug like national politicians spouting the
same ideas as you.

But the thing is, we are both right.  Although his suit was better. 

The first mass-literacy revolution ran roughly in parallel with the
Commercial and Industrial Revolutions in Europe.  But apart from the
usual things we associate with literacy, things like sharing ideas
widely, democratic access to knowledge and so on, the one that is
often *missed* is that ideas have to be much more precisely expressed
when you write them down.  If you go around making speeches, each
person can walk off with different ideas as to what you said but
writing it down means it is waaay harder to mistake what you meant.

WIth software this applies to the n'th degree. There is no longer any
forgiving human mind in the way of your writing to work out what you
really meant. Software is unforgiving. The compiler will do what you
tell it.  And this means we shall have to write down what we really
mean.

This is going to be a problem.

- self driving car issue
- access to agorithms
- gorillas AI

Some computer vision AI software failed to see black women as human
faces - accurately reflecting the cultural make up of the AI
laboratory it sprang from.  And we shall have to solve the multiutude
of robotic actions in the real world that were previosuly left to
chance.  See the chapter on self-driving cars for example.

So software literacty is not just a nice fluffy teach the world to
code idea.  It is going to be a fundamental questioning of every
aspect of our society and assumptions.  And we will need much much
better at resolving those conflicts - large scale democratic politics
does not seem to be good at this. Although, as per Churchill, it is a
*lot* better than all the others.

I do not see this as some portent of doom. More that we are *already*
in a world too sophisticated for any one mind to understand.  We rely
utterly on the expertese, and indeed munificence of others.  Its just
that the procedures for all these are still hidden and opaque. Partly
because it is commercailly beneficial, but the vast majority of the
time it is just the processes have not been made into software, and so
are not accessible.


Some companies are more software literate than others. It is hard to
define this but we can see some outlines in the fog.  They are
basically around a quote from Googler <name> ::

       "SRE is what happens when you ask a software engineer to design
        an operations team".

And we can extend that to ::

       "Software Literacy is what happens when you ask (a Western
       Political Liberal) Software Engineer to design a company"

I have dropped in the political leanings of the software engineer,
because that will come to matter, and beause i am doing the desigining
and it is always good to know thyself.

Lets have a look at what happens when Software Engineers do not design
a company, and it breaks its own literacy.

Knight Capital
--------------

Knight Capital should have been software literate.  It was a new
company, built to operate in the high-frequency trading world of US
equities, and had invested heavily in programmers and computers

Their business model was *market making* - buying shares from someone
who wanted to sell, waiting a bit, and selling them to someone who
wanted to buy. Market making is a valued part of all exchanges, and
way back, when the Exchange gave a priviledged few the right to be
market makers (for a fee of course) it was a very profitable exercise.
However as new market makers were granted access, such as Knight
Capital, the profits dropped (good for buyers and sellers, such as our
pension funds) and the competition sped up - slow market makers did
not get to trade with anyone.

On August 1, 2012, Knight Capital released a new version of their
software. And did so in a partly-manual manner.  Those words, 'not
automated' make those who are software literate shudder.  Imagine
having a book as a loose sheaf of papers, unbound.  You know its just
missing something.  Surely things will eventually get all muddled up.
And sure enough, at Knight Capital, they had left an old, debug
version of the code on one of their servers. Which now merrily started
placing *test* orders onto the *real* market.

Test orders, such as Buy high and Sell at a loss, and repeat 10,000
times in a few fractions of a second.

Knight Capital tried to turn off their mistakes, but 45 minutes later
(an eternity in HFT) they had mistakenly executed 4 million orders for
100+ stocks, and lost 440 million dollars, effectively bankrupting the
company.  Other players in the market had of course realised something
was wrong, and initially expected the orders to be turned off within
seconds. When it was not, they merrily took the winning side on all
Knight Capitals traded and pocketed the cash. No point turning down
free money is there?

Knight Capital's process of getting software that had been written
correctly out and into the hands of users (ie the equivalent of
publishing) was broken.  A newspaper that could write brilliant
articles but struggled with the whole delivering bundles to street
vendors would not last long.

In software, this publishing is called a release, but its as vital as
the process of publishing and delivering paper was to the Post.
Companies I have worked in have had ranges of automated releases done
a few times a day, or manually a few times a year.  Guess who felt
more ... literate.

It is worth noting that Knight Capital paid the full price for their
failure to control their literacy. However, this market imposed
discipline, which is societally a Good Thing, does not apply equally.
Goldman Sachs did a similar thing in 2016, sending broken orders.
Then instead of being forced to pay the price for their mistake, they
simply agreed with the exchange that those orders *did not count*,
reverted the changes and did not pay a billion for their own
education.

Thats simply wrong.  Remeber our nice fluffy liberal "everyone is
equal" values. That should apply to everyone.

Office Of Personnel Management
------------------------------

In June 2015, the US government agency "Office of Personnel
Management" announced it had suffered a data breach.  Starting in
March 2014, external hackers had breached the firewalls around the
agency and were able to access the personnel records of millions of
current and former government workers.  The agency collected many
things, like pay records, but also, held background checks on
employees who needed higher levels of security clearance - in short
they had the records that said you used to be a drug addict or
depressed. All the stuff they want to know about you in case it is
used to balckmail you.

This was it seems all stored on mainframes running COBOL.  And the
thing about storing data is that you must at minimum, encrypt it at
rest on disk.  This is like, using ink or folders or filing
cabinets. Its something you don't even think about.  Not for stuff
that foreign governments can use to blackmail your Embassy staff with.

So lets get this clear.  Vital security information and pay records,
stored unencrypted on mainframes that are so old they cannot spell
encryption, and then the Chinese hackers get in.

This breach, discovered seemingly by accident when a computer
forensics firm was asked to preapre a demo, is not something solvable
by replacing credit cards.  It is probably America's deepest national
security problem for the next few decades.  Well, one of them.

This is a defining moment in software professionalism.  The right move
for a professional and so the right move for a software literate
organisation, was to shutdown the impossible-to-secure mainframes and
announce a budget request and a migration plan.

Things like intrusion detection programs would have been good, but
thats just "normal best practise" not "professional ethics".

Now, why did the woman at the top (not likely a malicious actor) why
did she not take this action? Because of the degree of obfuscation?
Possibly. But the one thing that leaps out of OPM is the inabiliy to
enmcrypt on COBOL mainframes.

Perhasp Everything else is justifiable in the hindsight race.  But
when you simply cannot do the job ethics dictates you dont pretend and
carry on.

OPM shows us that one defining quality of software literacy will be
professional ethics. to quote Spiderman, "with great power comes great
responsibility".  For the next generation at least, software literacy
will be unevenly spread throughout the world.  And the importance of
software to the world at large is so great that we should ensure those
who wield that importance are not just expected to be trustworthy, but
are monitored by their peers.

Professional Ethics still matters

Sweden Ministry of Transport
----------------------------

So just as we thought OPM was bad, the Swedish Government stood up,
looked the US Feds in the eye and said, "Hold my beer"

https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/blog/2017/07/swedish-transport-agency-worst-known-governmental-leak-ever-is-slowly-coming-to-light/


Target and Yahoo
----------------

Target and Yahoo make interesting case studies. Target in 2014 had
given a Air conditioning contractor access *into* their internal
network, from the A/C contractor's own network.  So when the A/C
contractor was breached, the Target internal network was just a hop
away.

Target lost millions of credit card details, and, probably more
importantly lost their CEO because of the public reaction.

Yahoo, had attackers copy 1 Billion (image) email addresses and
passwords.  They only admitted it because they had to for SEC
rulings. (check)

Target is probably when software security failings first took a major
scalp.  Yahoo is probably the last.

Equifax
--------

Equifax is worse - waaaay worse because in this mucked up world of
mothers maidennname they alga every away all the answers. God knows
what the effect will be but unless the swedes shoot the manager and
Equifax goes out of business then we will never fix these security
issues


You want security in your company - fire the head of the CIA if he
can't keep his affairs secret. Fire people who breach
secrets. Otherwise stop worrying about it


Healthcare.gov
--------------

As part of Barack Obama's healthcare reforms (back pre-Trump, if you
can rememebr that far back) a government agency was tasked with
setting up a online exchange that would allow hundreds of millions of
Americans to search for and find the most suitable of the new
insurance contracts that were available.  The project was handled in
the usual manner, and as is usual for large software projects it
failed to achieve its goals.  THis was hugely embarrasing and
*actually meant a large scale political initiative was at risk because
software it depended on was badly written*. (THis in itself is a
seismic moment.)

So the while mess was put in the lap of one of the new Breed of
GOvernment Best-practise Digital Agency, who proceeded to rescue the
mess, using best practise appraches. (it was not an unalloyed success,
but it worked).  Famously the attitude used was boiled down to a quote
from a frustrated DevOps engineer, who during a fraught and well
populated project meeting asked "If I cannot deploy New Relic (a
systems monitoring system) I'm gonna punch somebody".

WHilst violence in the workplace is obbiously forbidden, the teams it
seems divided along the lines of people who thought it was obvious to
use these new tools, and thus obvvious that someone banned from using
them should get driven to rage, and those who thought it was obvious
to follow the old, way.

THis dividing line is what i think of as the software literate line.
The point at which one thinks "WTF?" when looking at processes or
services.  The point at which a literate person would look at a
company or society that, for example, has a legion of clergymen, who
stand up in chilly expensive cathedrals, and read out political
declarations.  And say, "Why not just print them and nail them to the
church door so people can just read it themselves?"

That is the dividing line.  That is the sort of change to society
softeware literacy threatens.


What have we learnt
-------------------

A software literate company will not necessarily have these issues
fixed and working perfectly, but they will be top of mind, and
everyone in the company will know, not "something is wrong" but "this
thing right here is not happening"

Look at the famous "New Relic Punch".  There was not "we do not know
what is going on" but a clear "if I do this I will know what is going
on".

OPM shows us the new scope of ethics, and Healthcare.gov shows us
"normal best pracise"


There is hope
-------------

Government Digital Services


However, these are not normal, or default, or even expected. They are
high profile and positive. But legal frameworks (from privacy laws to
the defintion of a company) have not changed.  We need to go further
in changing the structure of a company.


Tim Cook Manifesto
http://time.com/collection/davos-2019/5502591/tim-cook-data-privacy/

It's not the right manifesto - but it at least has a heavy hitter and is an indication of direction


A New Hope
==========

GDPR
Plus rulings like this (https://techcrunch.com/2018/11/20/how-a-small-french-privacy-ruling-could-remake-adtech-for-good/) that will unpick the privacy issue - or rather the "who has my data" issue.

privacy again 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/18/technology/facebook-privacy.html




The rare, right way
-------------------

The failures above are all very varied. Amount them no obvious
solutions.  This is the point - we simply do not know what the
Washington post of often years Hence will look and behave like.  But
like the team at healthcare, we don't need to We need to follow "best
practise".  Sadly there is no written how to on that - it is more the
gross difference between a Washington post set up and run by a
literate editor and that setup and run by an illiterate - charlelemn



* software poliktics and snowden and Cathy gatekeepers of new news.
  Not news but models

* conway and coase - structure of organisations and markets

* Who owns you? devices, data, profit from data, externalities compensation

* professionalism - growing up - Cracked, its what you can do for others
  reliability. Its like an API for a software dev - and same for a software team
  See the API

* culture and software
  literate companies, esp those with literate output, had a new culture.
  a more open culture in europe. It just came with reading.
  I cannot imagine working on a code base I cannot roam around in
  Add in pixar and candour, and its a new culture.
  



Software is politics now
========================

http://blog.memespring.co.uk/2015/09/14/product-land-part-3/
::

    """Politics in the 21st century will, in part, be about control
    over the digital services we now rely on, and which hold an ever
    growing concentration of our personal and household data, from how
    often we move (fitbit, jawbone), where to (Google Play Services),
    what we tell people (WhatsApp, Facebook) and to how often we burn
    our toast (Nest)."""

The types of organisations that *can* exist are likelyt to have ot
expand We need a software literate civil service as urgently as we
need more start ups.  GDS is a marvellous step in the right direction

Weapons of math destruction and the hidden hand - Asimov ?


The revolution has not happened yet
-----------------------------------

https://medium.com/absurdist/the-computer-revolution-has-yet-to-happen-f1dbf983d477#.a9n5t8be6

Devices are curated not owned by us The APIs do not exist because vast
majority of users could not use them - would need to buy another app

Pen and paper ?



.. #: http://www.hrc.utexas.edu/educator/modules/gutenberg/books/legacy/



A Mea Culpa - from me and Uncle Bob
http://blog.paul-brian.com/2015/06/05/being-professional/

::

  Conclusion The trick to handling pressure is to avoid it when you can,
  and weather it when you can’t. You avoid it by managing commitments,
  following your disciplines, and keeping clean. You weather it by
  staying calm, communicating, following your disciplines, and getting
  help

So as we know what is wrong, it is useful to dive into why, and what
to do about it.  Uncle bob recommends managing pressure - and Inwoukd
like to suggest that professionalism is an API we present to our stake
holders - like "keeping a promise"

The APIs -

    source control
    Keeping it readable

    tech debt and tech assets - code and tests
    Debt and assets

    requirements lifecycle (PEP)
    Theory of the firm vs professionalism

    automated build and deployment (dogfood)
    Staying clean

    Documentation and Marketing
    Again a cost of independence in market place

    openness and reviews
    Non n

    Progress Not Perfection (YouTube clip)

    static and other analysis

    performance mgmt and measuring everything (and making reports on everything)

    Automatic project mgmt

    Risk management

    have fun, try new things, don't be afraid

    Requirements Lifecycle (PEPs)

Maintaining a distance, is anathema to Agile hugs.
But look at IR35 SDC - Supervised, Directed and Controlled.
(The theory of the firm, transaction costs, Fonald Coase and IR35. Why requirements management is and is not good for you)

Why is it a good idea
Why is it a bad idea
Is it in my ideal project?

Can I craft a set of ideals for my Open Source Project and how do they touch upon the wider world of professionalism and crafts-person-ship.

A multi layered API for software engineers.
I keep stuffing it up. I am a fairly good coder - and have survived almost 20 years as developer, CTO and consultant. So I occasionally get it right.

Remote pair programming

After the fact ticketd

https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/tedtalks-audio/id160904630?mt=2&i=346210793

Teams not super chickens

    there are no rock stars - we need everyone
    there is only one standard of quality - the best. It is not the enemy of the good. Prioritisation is the enemy
    theory of the team is same as theory of the firm. Let the market decide

Candour

The three goals of software engineering
Reliability
Stability
Progress

As the joker says, "no one panics if everything is going according to plan"
Reliability, even if that means having to reboot every 24 hours, is still reliable
Stability is better - not having to reboot every 24 hours
Progress is the best - not having a joker in the pack
Chaos monkey as a white hat joker.

Release Management

    window of pain
    why it is complex
    Apple style checklists

    automate the build

    privacy
    It's the new pollution- it has enormous benefits to society and its productive capability (ie medical research) but like industrial pollution it has downside and we have not managed to cope with the downside in 150 years. The U.S. Democratic model seems to lead the world in dealing best with pollution (not worried about German vs US standards of chicken handling - look at Russian radiation handling or the Middle East approach to spills.

We're global remember.



Why write a book?
-----------------

  Writing is nature’s way of showing us how sloppy our thinking is.


 Leslie Lam-port


http://blog.fogus.me/2015/11/04/the-100101-method-my-approach-to-open-source/
Keep lots on the go and see what pops
Antithesis of project planning
Psychological
Creative


Do you know what James Watt's second most famous invention was? The
carbon copy paper < http://cnx.org/content/m32173/latest/>_ used to
keep the various parts of an multinational steam engine company
synchronised - Watt had to invent a new technology to cope with the
vast growth his first invention had spawned


Shakespeare and Company
Left bank of seine
What does a software bookshop look like? What events does it engender?

When does data become proprietary
--------------------////////------


Google encrypts the referrer header
But that is what a person types in as search term

Why is that private not public?

European courts missing the point
https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/the-economist-radio-all-audio/id151230264?mt=2&i=361720969

Possible free trade battle
But the battle is over the wrong thing
Data is public - it just is on vastly larger scales than we realise (pea souper fallacy)

Not only that but free trade areas in data will be needed to avoid
Balkanisation of the Internet

It's not unavoidable - it should be a free vs unfree world
The new capitalism - free data

Private data is private, unless published
There was a huge backlash against this for the first and other amendments
See the uk government under fox / Pitt

But the principal has held well
And we need to refresh it - and redefine publish in light of pea souper

http://uk.businessinsider.com/jobs-that-are-quickly-disappearing-thanks-to-robots-2016-2?r=US&IR=T



Open vs closed not right
Oppressive vs liberating is closer

Public data about us can be oppressive, can be limiting
But finding the balance is key
And the default should be open just as default was open for amweica



Exporting democracy

Where does half the world look to for inspiration?
Western democracy or Chinese capitalism without representation?

Democracy is exported - nation to nation, generation to generation
We need to define the new society with new parameters

European democracy is under threat, even building a wall around Mexico

Who wants that ?

Solutions

- remove financial spikes through removing tax relief on loan interest
- allow the natural state of software literacy to be enshrined in the societies norms laws codes and markets
- what is the natural state of software literacy

- best example is open source:

Open
Totally open
Candour
Democracy ?
Meritocracy
Evidence led



The shape of companies and countries to come
--------------------------------------------

So my hypothesis is that software literacy is a real thing,
that it will create programmable companies, and that companies that
have a nervous system, that can be controlled with smaller numbers of humans
instead of having to have humans in place of automation, we shall see
smaller companies due to Ronald Coase theory of the firm

As such these smaller firms can negotiate better deals but what will be the environment
in which they do that

- free trade areas - a perfect market
- common market
- federal system

Discuss European referendum


What’s more, as software eats the world, one side effect is that rewards accrue nonlinearly to those with the best software


Politics and software
---------------------

One thing worth noting is that if he is right, and Facebook (and lesser extent Google and Twitter) represent the new gatekeeper / aggregator for political news, then there is a crying need for their algorithms to be public, and there is a whole industry of political SEO

https://stratechery.com/2016/the-voters-decide/


CIA and job protection
----------------------

America is 50x richer than the rest of the world, but
Let's face it, that's historical accident and some luck of
Democratic capitalism culture

Now the world is consensus - we all know democratic capitalism of some form is the way to go
So will the USA stay fifty times richer? No

Will they get poorer in absolute terms or just wait
in stagnation while everyone else catches up (pretty much what middle class wages have done relative to China)

Either way, USA is likely to fight - hence the CIA and the hegemonic back doors - the use of intelligence gathering against Brazilian companies.

It is Canute turning the tide back.  By throwing stones.

It's not going to be pretty

Redefining privacy
------------------

There is a new round of crypto-wars going on (see Obama speech "absolutist")
But this is part of wider discussion around meaning of privacy

It's a privative

It's based in secure in ones home - constitution

But let's look at ambient computing.
Intelligent context aware programming

Scenario: I walk from my kitchen to the living room, and the music I had playing dims in kitchen
And starts up in living room speakers.  I say "house! Something more dinner jazz please, and dim the lights"

Now to do this I must have computer monitoring me and my voice
It must stream music, electric usage will dip.


How can I defend my privacy?
Do I really care ?
Prevention of annoyance?
My music tastes probably say only a little politically
but what films I watch, what documentaries? Fox News or CNN ?


Social organisation and software
- software as it needs precision highlights a lot
For example conways law - social organisation of contributors reflects the software produced

http://hintjens.com/blog:112

More clearly is need for individual rights
This is a politically accepted thing in real world - but as we move to situation where whole world is a contributor what happens? Much more planning and modelling?


Productivity :

The second biggest issue of our time
Basically the low hanging fruit of mechanisation has gone.

Productivity as measure of energy used to output

The future is more complex solutions to drive smaller increments in productivity until energy becomes orders magnitude cheaper or our usage orders more sophisticated

This should be the big win for electronics

What we are missing is organisational change to cope with it.

Most organisations hold back productivity- and fixing that will be hard

- also remote working and competition across the globe

Privacy:

The biggest issue of our time
The modern day pollution
The issue is who sets the laws
The issue is we must be regulated (murder)
The issue is we shall see Google become a utility in need of regulation - but under whose jurisdiction?

How in Europe do we set this? How in USA? What about China (monitoring all )

Privacy shield - max schremms

Audio visual media services directive - tv regulation. Country of origin country of destination

Unregulated is impossible
Light regulation means skills and information to deal with

The less regulation, the more transparency and individual tools to compensate

My view: it is harmful to insist on country of destination style solutions to regulation as these allow dictatorships to censor

We should have global agreements on base regulation (child pornogrpahy, hate speech etc) and enforce transparency - and it is upto destinations to educate and provide tools to support their choices.


The emerging politics
---------------------
An understanding of politics of technology
Icelands pirate party
http://uk.mobile.reuters.com/article/idUKKCN11Z1RV
Tom Watson
Calling out footballer


The emerging secure computing platform
--------------------------------------


tmzt 32 minutes ago | parent | on: South Korea military cyber command was hacked

RiscV, TCP+crypto offload, hardware switchports with luajit or nf rules. Reactive UI with hardware rendering and compositing.
Hardware keystore with physical switch to generate and enroll keys, user/owner controlled secrets, one-time programmable as an option, hardwired SAK and OS personality switching key.
Real-time security isolation kernel, hardware-enforced containerization with MMU-protected GPU passthrough.

https://news.ycombinator.com/reply?id=12623911&goto=threads%3Fid%3Dlifeisstillgood%2312623911






.. 

Company
-------
* Software literacy
* walked examples
* so what is a company, why does it exits?
  victorian company, modern tech stoneage mind <- problem
  solow / coase / economic theory on markets <- theory
     modern_tech,_victorian_companies_and_stone_age_minds
  solutions:
    new company
    programmable
    smaller coaseian coefficient
    democractic / transparnet decision making
    regulatable
    
* Elements of new company
* programmable company
* coase curve breaking point
* remote working / physical location / 
* comparison with film making not relevant
* fixed elements of company -> manufacturing. But this is light indutrial
* democracy / coase / understanding the mission vs doing as told
  plus expains why MBAs never talk straight -
  A hierarchy is hard to be open in
  democracy breeds right ansers and openness.
  Even if it is hard
  hiring_ringers.rst
  
* swardley mapping - landscape-strategy, simple_to_complex_roadmaps
* technical limitations on future - tape/disks, parallelism, privacy
  futureshifts.rst
* marketingbenefits


Not agile - use rfc based development

Not agile - North Korea - turns out that for most engineering problems, if you kill middle mangers frequently enough everyone else stops talking to spies and works hard

========================================
What I cannot create I do not understand
========================================



.. figure:: http://static.duartes.org/img/blogPosts/feynmanLastBoard.gif

When Richard Feynman died in 1988, his chalkboard at CalTech contained
several notes, including the one that has struck such a cord with me

::

  What I cannot create I do not understand

This says *everything* I want to say about why Open Source Software is
important, why re-creating the existing work is important, why open
and transparent - ness works, why things need to be evovled not designed
and why, we cannot understand everything.

It takes a genius to put all that in 8 words.


So, what can be extracted from eight words.

* Build from scratch
* Open Source keeps re-inventing the wheel
* software is evolved
* relax.

Build from scratch
------------------

One of my software development tenets is you should be able to *build
your whole systems from scratch*.  That is given bare metal hardware,
get up and running, not from a few lucky backups and _dd_ but from
controlled scripted installs.

I have always thought this vital - without being able to (re)create
your systems, how do you know if you can in a disaster, or more
importantly that you can when it is not a disaster.  ITs impossible to
believe that the first time you installed your webserver you got it
perfect, first time, but if you cannot rebuild it with confidence, you
just will put off rebuilding it again and again until it is a mess of
libraries, patches and symlinks that you could never hope to remmeberm
nor worse, simplifiy.  Now expand that to your DNS, file server, your
database.

But being able to run a simple script, and the system is configured,
that makes life so much simpler.  I can read the script and see what it
will do.  I can change it, experiment, confident that I can just rerun
the original and get back to where I started.  And I can run the script
and go do something more interesting.

And no, I do not believe in _dd_, _ghost_ or other image based
methods.  Yes, they are very nice for Virtualisation, but always there
is a flaw - to get to an image, one has to build the original.  If you
build the original by hand, how do you know what steps you took - how
sure can you be? The Sysadmin was very careful?  Was he? Thats nice.
Oh look a new patch is out, and we no longer want to use version 5.2.2
of php and can we put the incompatible library onto only half of the
hosts.  Can you rebuild all of the images to do that, by tomorrow?
Still going to be careful are you?


Build from scripts, from scratch.

And you know what, I finally worked out why I was so insistent on this,
in the face of others desire to take the easy route.  Quite simply because
I did not understand a system till I had wrestled it enough to automate it.

You find out where all the gaps are when you try and automate a system.


Re-inventing the wheel
----------------------
I am (re)writing a ER diagramming tool, for about the third time. This time no
funny copyright issues with my employers, I swear.

But there are many ER tools out there. And there are many languages, databases,
games and more.  This does not stop us from writing another, just as
the existence of a Haynes car manual does not stop people from taking their
car engine apart.  We do it because we do not understand, and we want to learn.

Sometimes, there is an itch to scratch.  But often the itch is for knowledge,
and the desire to know if we *can*.  Benefiting the rest of the world is what we
do to share our knowledge.


Evolution
---------

Because we have to re-invent the wheel to teach the next generation,
we tend to incrementally improve.  And that is a slow evolutionary process.

Software *evolves* to fit its niche.

Relax
-----

I am sometimes troubled by comparing myself to some of life's winners.  But
looking at Feynman makes those comparisons silly.  A genius that other genius'
thought a genius, he still tried to understand this strange world we live in,
and had no more a grasp on *why* than the rest of us poor schmucks.

So, we do what we can.  And move the world on a little bit.  Some more than
others, I must admit, but I am happy to be pushing it in the right direction.
==============================
Price of gold is fairly stable
==============================

------------------------------

I do love me a bit of Ancient Rome.  And I love the term Solid - it came from the solidus, a gold coin minted by Constantine 315AD

Domain have done some amateur digging and will try the following: in Neros day 2 denarii would buy a Modius, which was sufficent grain for ten days for one average male (two one pound loaves a day, there is a diet to make wheat intolerant weep)

Now the aureus was replaced by the solidus, but it was about 25 denarii.  So we can say that one gold coin bought you about 100 -120 days worth of basic food.

A kuggerand is about four times the weight of gold as a aureus, and it's about £1,000 to buy today. And at £3 per day I could carefully feed myself.  Certainly in bread alone.

So over nearly 2000 years, a gold coin is roughly enough to feed one man for three months.

Fascinating

Biblio
------
- http://www.forumancientcoins.com/dougsmith/worth.html
- https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aureus
==============
What a foul up
==============

==============
(this is posted here because I can't post over 2000 characters to HN and I wanted a bit more space)

So, I made a dick move yesterday. I misunderstood someone's comment (or I misunderstood their intention) and ... well @dang accused me of racewar and something about stone tablets and science.

I was of course outraged and reacted. Then a minute later I took a deep breath and reacted better.

We all value our reputation and having a judgement so clearly divergent from my own self perception has caused some internal reflection.

You see, there is an old joke about the definition of a liberal - a conservative who just got arrested.

Looking at my self in the mirror, I still see a sensible well balanced person, with strong liberal tendencies (who has worked at the UK version of ACLU, organised anti-intimidation watchdogs at voting booths in racially charge elections in London, and so on - things which while true when repeated here they still sound hollowly like "some of my best friends are")

I am sure dang and the other hard working moderators see a lot of crap in their job.  I am of course *certain* that that was not what I meant - who me?

Except that one thing middle age teaches you is that, quite often, it is you.

So yes, when someone arrives with a Vote Trump T shirt they probably do not find HN an easy place to discuss things in the terms they usually use.  And they will I am sure always protest "but it was not me, but what I said was perfectly sensible debate / free speech, how dare you accuse me like that, gosh you should treat people better around here, I am off to Breightbart"

But just like the recently arrested conservative I want to say just that (well not the breightbart bit obviously, but I certainly felt ill-used. Especially the bit about "other breaches of the guidelines in my previous history". Yeah gulp. I have asked for a list - in my case because I want to analyse and improve. Clearly those other cases where people ask they are just indignant)

But no matter what, I have been sorted into the basket of deplorables.

- Did I make a mistake and step down the slippery slope thinking I had good grips on my shoes?

- Did I not notice the slope?

- Am I actually deplorable?

- Or is it all the fault of those evil moderators ?

Actually this last point is not fair. I have reread the post and - I really failed to convey my thoughts. What is posted there is ... a horrific comment. (I can remember what I meant. I can see where I missed out indicative punctuation. But thats not the point is it.) Totally not what I meant and hopefully would never ever think. But someone I respect has come back with "well thats not actually out of character for you Paul.  We were thinking of banning your account for some of the stuff you have said".  That has shaken me deeply and I would like to know what has lead them there.  And how can I adjust my public statements to better reflect me.

So I herewith apologise to everyone on HN or elsewhere for posting text that reads so horrifically. Even if I did not mean it, I still wrote it.

I also need to think about why I post stuff too quickly, why I chose such am inflammatory subject to post on anyway, and why I did not review.

Fewer words. More thought.

I am going to take a bit of a break.

I have spent many years on HN (and am probably a little too anxious to be this close to 10,000).

Apart from satirical news shows on radio 4, it's my main source of information on the world. (This may of course not be a great thing.)

So a break is called for - I check too often, and while Facebook is often criticised by us for its addictive-like properties, I still obsessively check HN morning and night and am sooo close to 10k and my last couple of submissions did feel more like testing the reactions for points, not sharing something.


(Actually re-re-re-reading my offending post I can see I meant to put a question mark (or more ??!!) at the end of the first paragraph - so a challenge to the poster looks a lot like a statement of .. oh fuck me what a disaster.  I was remembering what I meant, not reading what I actually wrote.  It really does read like a trolling post - I can quite see what happened there.  But the "other posts violating our guidelines" indicates its a good time to take a break till I have processed things.)

Start here: https://news.ycombinator.com/reply?id=13010342&goto=threads%3Fid%3Dlifeisstillgood%2313010342

I am sure cold turkey will last a day, maybe a couple of weeks.  Please don't discover working fusion power while I am away.  I really want to comment on that.
=================
Tendency to guess
=================

Sat scores and scoring penalty
Katherine Kauffman Harvard business chill

Code reviews should be based on performance metrics

Engineers do not judge bridge changes based on style guides

Choose based on metrics - means we need metrics


https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/features.weekend
Braben and bell wrote elite. And their life stories are the prototypical coder life goals - build a business of coders or withdraw and focus on family. I want both - and that day's a lot ==============================
The Journey of Mikado Software
==============================

==============================

The journey to freedom
----------------------

I was made redundant in 2008, from a nice CTO job in London's City, at the
height of the financial crisis.

Now, I have worked in the "Internet Industry" since 1995.  Yes I am that old.
And I have done most jobs, from CTO to consultant, Developer to DBA.  I ran some
of the UK's first ADSL trials back when 14.4 modem was a big deal, have written
software for the FTSE100 and the footie club.  And so I decided not to take
it lying down.

Two weeks later, I walked into a new contracting job, and I hustled, and hunted,
worked my way up the salary ladder, started my own consultancy and landed the
*big gig*.

It was the worst move I ever made.

I sat in a car for between 2 and 4 hours a day (and I never knew how long the
trip would be).  And I was not curing cancer so I could hardly claim my work was
worth the sacrifice.

.. figure:: /assets/images/m25.jpg

I saw my children only when they were asleep, or at weekends, when I was
exhausted. My wife saw me for about ten minutes before we climbed into bed and
slept shattered.  It put strains on my marriage and our kids.

And I put on nearly two stone.

So, as that contract ended, I swore to stop.  I did not need to actually be in an office, watched to see if I was slacking off.  I could work remotely, from
anywhere, for anyone.

And things turned a corner.  I was able to walk into
work, able to make breakfast for my kids, let my wife have a lie in and a cuppa.[#]_

It is not heaven, bills still need to be paid, relationships repaired, the office is tiny.

But like nearly 3 out of 4 workers, my job does not need to involve me
travelling to the same office as everyone else.  Nearly 75% of us could do the
same job from *anywhere*.  And we could do it minutes from our families, our
lives.

The more of us who make that break, who escape, the more our societies will
shift.  Till raising a family stops being a struggle that tears us from being
productive in work.


The journey for freedom
-----------------------

One of the defining characteristics of the next decade of the Internet is
the vast, vast amount of data that will be available, and the new insights
that data will afford us.  But it is too much data for any one company to
own it and use it.  All the pharamceutical companies will need to share their results to find the next break throughs, all the financial companies will need to
share their trades to avoid the next crash.

Data will have to be *open* to be *big* and with that will come the open software to handle the data, and the open forms of working (like above) that will
be used to write the software.

And this is my second journey - I am a `passionate believer
<http://www.oss4gov.org/manifesto>`_ in the role of open source in public sector
software.  Mikado Software is driven to put high quality, open software into
government and public sector hands.  We are not a lone voice, the new NHS Spine2 will be built on the open source Python language (a speciality of Mikado) and the Government Digital Service is not just revamping websites, but pushing the
very defintion of Open and Agile into the heart of UK government.

Journey's End
-------------

I care passionately about my family, which makes me not unique.  I also care
passionately that governments, councils and citizens all have the right to read
the software that more and more runs our lives.  The right to read it, critique
it, and one day remove the offending code.  Just as we do with our written laws
today.

Software matters now, and will matter more in the future.  It need to be kept
free and open so the laws that run our lives are as accessible as the laws that
govern us.

Mikado Software is the end of two journeys, a company that treats work that can
be done anywhere as an opportunity to work anywhere, and a company that creates
the future of public services.



.. [#]   (I am pretty sure I am supposed to get the occassional lie-in too, but she says it's in the marriage contract.  Subsection B, paragraph ii. I'm scared to look just in case.)
=================
Topless computing
=================

(June 2007)

Not nearly as much fun as it sounds
===================================

The other day I was asked by a member of staff if it would be possible to tie
the holiday spreadsheet into the master workplanner application.

Now *possible* is a horrible word for IT people, because it is *always*
possible.  Its really a question of is it a good idea.

I said, well, not until the holiday recording was taken out of spreadsheet form
and put into something that was less ... topless.

Yes, I got the eyebrow reaction.

However it does make sense.  We do not know what the future is going to hold, so
it is always sensible to put our data and code into a form that makes it easy /
simple / feasible to build another system on top of it.

In other words we should build our systems to be **top-less**.

Of course, like in the real world, there are varying degrees of topless.  A
spreadsheet is possible to extract data from.  Perhaps I could write a
Python-server that looked at Excel at one end and spat out HTML / JSON the
other. But then I need to map employeeIDs between excel and this other thing,
and write some interpreter for the weird way the spreadsheet deals with time,
and it would probably be a good idea to cache the dates for speed, which means a
storage engine, and by this time I have written yet another half-assed
application, that still does not handle half-days sick, nor talk to the payroll,
nor know anything about regulations.

But to get rid of it will mean *me* going off finding a list of decent payroll
applications, and asking if they are topless.

Which always makes for a fun phone call.


To me **topless computing** is really, truly **user-friendly** software.  But by
that I assume there are computer literate users being considered.  Because
user-friendly does not mean it has a nice UI, it does not mean it has predictive
text.  It means that when I want to extend it, it does not get in the way.
(Some describe this as difference between *plumbing* and *porcelain*).

If all users could write source code, all programs would be topless. Or at least
have easy to remove bikinis. [#]_ And that is ultimately why I go around talking
about topless computing.

Because it sounds naughty.


European topless computing directive - the idea that this accessibility needs to be enforced as a competitive need. Owning up banking like PSD2
Making personal data geneuninely owned by the person and making the computing substrate accessible and open - thinknautomatic cars



.. [#] OK, yes this is a bit sexist.


Software as capital 
Capex
Software as infrastructure 
Now it is capital each should look to standards to enable not mere reuse but composability - look to stripe and Patrick m 

A Useful theory of software engineering
(Adolph / Kruchten) - a good over view - basically it's a social process over the whole of the developer community - making the community of developers an important thing to manage - an implication not merely for large open source projects but indeed internal engineering teams.


================================
Why Am I writing these articles?
================================

================================

Something about tech needing to be for the 100% not the majority only - http://www.cracked.com/article_24934_5-ways-technology-can-unintentionally-become-racist.html

Whilst my daughter usually asks "Why are you singing like that?" (the answer to
which is "I am tone deaf darling") there is a simpler reason for writing a site
like this - I have reached the age where Homer Simpson is becoming a model of
clarity and reason.


.. raw:: html

   <iframe width="420" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/8dbDJzDV1CM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>


Basically, I need to get the old stuff out of my brain and down onto paper, or at least blogroll, so I can go and
have fun learning some new stuff.

I hope you enjoy what is getting pushed out of my brain.  I also hope it helps you.

Fake News: crowd behaviour (rumour) in a crowd of publishers (it's not facebook that has caused it, they just monitor all the publishers - you can hear anyone in the crowd shout anything.  we need to chart our own course in a crowd - this is a crowd where we follow not because we are physically pushed but because we choose to / do not see guided alternatives

potential mixes include libertarian paternalism ...

A point about Software Literacy
-------------------------------

* Software Literacy is an important concept - it is hard for us to
  recongise how literacy has shaped us and our society. Look at road
  signs. And it is hard to recognise how much software literacy will
  change companies, socieites and opportunities.  This is the
  underlying message of "Software is eating the world" - we have made
  a world that only works because everyone in it can read and write.
  We are making a new world, where everyone will be expected to code.

* Software is subject to politics, but the importance of software is
  leaving development of softre to be driven by people who do not
  "understand" software (see literacy), and it is also leading to
  substandard software being allowed.  Regulation and
  professinalisation is likely to affect that.

* Almost all software development is about exploring.  And two things
  we can say about exploration - you never know how long it is going
  to take and it often is risky.  Guess what the vast majority of
  project planning and management try and do They demand time
  estimates and plan other items around that, and they do not schedule
  resources to mitigate risk.  In my experience, software takes as
  long as it takes.  All the running around and shouting, the pressure
  and the politics are just ways of selling the inevitable time /
  money / scope trade offs.

* Software literate company The value of building good software as a
  company
  tps://www.ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2018/8/29/tesla-software-and-disruption


- data driven business
the more (transactional) data that is generated the more likely a "moneyball" approach will lead to business analytics that allow programmable company to have real effect


Software Socialism
We live in very young democracies, and fake news - the "two faced" ability to say one thing to one person and another to a second person at scale is one of our biggest threats

But we invented socialism because society needed to find new rules

we need a new socialism 

Integrity in message
Having something to say 

(critique of American ciewsnof socaulism)

What does good software development feel like?
---------------------------------

https://podcasts.apple.com/gb/podcast/a16z/id842818711?i=1000435605773
(Early ios development)
It takes time, close to code
clear vision - use regression tests to ratchet the features you most want

other examples ?

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#stross1] Charlie Stross is well known for popularising, if not inventing, the idea of `corporations as slow AIs <http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2018/01/dude-you-broke-the-future.html>`_ 

