=================
Software Literacy
=================

I'm standing in a cavernous room underneath a bustling, noisy pub in
London's Covent Garden.  It was a fine Summers day and the evening is
sharply cooking.

I look around at the 90-odd developers, graduates and entrepreneurs in
the room, and, as I have been persuaded to sponsor this meeting, now
all I have to do is give a quick speech.

I never quite know what to do for these sort of speeches - so I decide
to give a history lesson. Yes. A history lesson. Gripping stuff, some
were even rolling their eyes in excitement.

It's a good one though. You see, in 1454, Johannes Gutenberg printed
the first of his Bibles using movable type - and ushered in a new era
of literacy and communication. Printing books was now orders of
magnitude cheaper, and there was an explosion of publishing. The
number of published books leapt from an estimated 30,000 books *in all
of Europe in 1450* to 12 million books by 1500.  Think about that. A
decent sized library today, in many large towns in England will have
30,000 books.  More than were in the whole of Europe before the
printing press. [#]_

Within a generation literacy in Western Europe had leapt from under 2%
to well over 20% - and it changed everything. Martin Luther was able
to nail a piece of paper to a church door and expect most members of
the middle-class congregation to simply read it, not have it read to
them by clergy. Books on mathematics and navigation enabled the
training of middle-class merchantmen who would then dare, only 40
years later, to cross the Atlantic.

Literacy en mass changed the course of human history and gave a tiny
corner EurAsia some huge advantages the effects of which are only just
wearing off five centuries later.

Before people wandered off to the bar I decided to let them know why
they were getting my best Simon Scharma impression.

Because, in my view, and remember they were eating my sausage rolls,
so that counts, in my view we are entering the age of a new form of
literacy - *software literacy.*

Even in the 15th century, nations, companies and guilds and churches
competed, and ran international concerns. But somewhere between
Gutenberg's Bible and Luther's 95 Theses these companies changed. Not
with business process reengineering, or total quality circles - but
changed like leaving the water and walking on land changed. I have no
idea how to quantify the advantages a company whose staff can all read
and write will have over a company whose staff are illiterate. It's
not one of lower labour cost, or better marketing, it's something
else...Deep in our bones we *know* that literacy changes everything.
Its so built into us and into everyone we know that we cannot imagine
a world where we cannot read or write.

Anyway, you, like the poor people wanting to get to the bar, can see
where I am taking this. The ability to marshall knowledge, to code and
compile and compute, the natural inclination to arrange the world so
it can be iterated over, the ability to turn a business from a
medieval scriptorium into an operating system is software literacy.

The final shape of a software literate company is probably unguessable
to us, in the same way that an airports departures board was
unguessable to Pope Pius II, or that a major newspaper run by
illiterate editors will look and work nothing like the Washington
Post. But we can be sure they are coming. And we can make sensible
predictions about what they will and won't be.

And so, as the Meetup wanders back to the bar slightly shocked, we
wander back to our theme.

The software literate company, and the programmable company
-----------------------------------------------------------

Software literacy for a company does not mean that it just hires a lot
of programmers, and calls the job done.  Thats been happening for a
long time and yet few companies manage to evolve.  I am hoping to
describe in this book a vision of a company *that does not exist yet*.
A truly literate company, in a world of other softwre literate
companies.  We cannot know for sure the shape such companies will
take - they will jostle and change in a complex dance of evolution,
but we can look at both positive and negative data we have today - how
companies have failed to act in a sane / literate manner, and how some
fundamentals of software literacy are shining thorugh and will be
unavoidable in the future.



.. figure:: _static/robards2.jpeg
   :width: 75%

   When I speak of a literate company, please keep this film in mind.

'All the President's Men' is one of my favourite films, engrossing and
suspenseful.  And it also portrays life in a deeply literate company.

I will take a leap and argue that the Washington Post under Ben
Bradlee was the epitome of a (non-software) literate company.  It had
well trained professionals, clear ethical standards, clear business
processes and clear processes for ensuring that its literate output
met their standards. Editors and copy-sub-editors and so on.  Oh, and
cashflow. That helped a lot.

I suggest that even companies like tech-behemoth Google are not really
software literate ... yet. But the clues are there. In the excellent
SRE book (link) author (link) the "founder" of SRE in Google, defines
SRE as "SRE is what happens when you ask a software engineer to design
an operations team".  As we go forward we shall find the software
literate companies are what happens when software engineers design
(found, run, populate and evolve) companies.  The flush of unicorns today in Silicon Valley are nearly software literate - the effort of founding a company is so huge that it's hard to believe that what results is what a software engineer would design. Things get missed.  But each generation of companies will steal from previous until the majority of a company is what would be designed.

Does it make a difference - well let's compare the old "knowledge company" and the new. In 2012 Google had a revenue of $50bn and a workforce of 40,000 - whereas the Barclays International also had a revenue of $50bn, but a workforce of 120,000.   Fast-forward to 2016 and google has grown to $89bn and 70,000 people.  Bank Of America in 2016 posted revenues of $89bn as well, and a workforce of over 200,000.  There are many caveats comparing these numbers, but all the firms involved are resolutely "knowledge-based" - the core processes of the firms do not involve smelting iron ore or manufacturing cars.  And yet one carries 2/3 less humans for same revenue.  One has used software in a markedly different manner.

My conjecture is that we are hitting a limit on what tracking company processes through accounting can do to limit wasteful (coase) growth. That by forcing more reproducible processes into 

And this is my definition of a programmable company - where all processes are visible in the virtual world 

Since 

Just as hundreds of years ago, it was what happens when you ask people
who can read and write to design companies.  It was not till
"everyone" could read and write in the 19th C that we saw the modern
company evolve. This is probably not a coincidence.

Whatever form a software literate company takes, there will be similar
foundational skills the company will need - the basics of journalism
if you wish, and the fundamentals of journalistic ethics did not come about by accident
- they evolved in lockstep with newspapers growing reach and impact.

We are already seeing calls for the software industry to regulate
itself, on privacy, on deals with repressive regiemes.  The answer is
not as simple as coders all being nice people.  But society needs to
regulate and also accept change.  We shall see that in section 2.

But companies, governments and organisations of every stripe, will need to adapt
to a new set of technologies that have a grain, a direction of travel, a tidal force.
Those techologies are here now, and our old organisational structures are no longer
sufficent.  

Lets look at it this way - Facebook, if it took all 1.5 BILLION users
and moved to a new land mass would be the worlds largest
country. Ever.

And it would be the least democratic. Ever. A one man dictatorship. No
law courts, no police, no constitution.  Nada.  And yet every Facebook
app using citizen would have more daily contact (what 3 hours a day?)
with its "government" than they ever had with their proper governments.

So companies, governments, organisations, the structures we all spend so much of our lives wirking within, need to change to get the best out of the new technologial opportunity we face.

Because it could be a golden future for humanity.


