=====================
Rewrite or Duct Tape?
=====================

I have several theses or *threads* running through this site, one of which is
you cannot be a IT manager without being a programmer.

It is a little bit controversial, mostly amoungst IT Managers who cannot
program.  I stand by the idea though - its a little like expecting an illiterate
to edit a newspaper, it is theoretically doable, but, why ?

One of the times when being a programmer is absolutely necessary is the
perennial "Should we re-write this hunk of junk to be better / cleaner / more
manageable?"

The correct answer will not be apparent till months or years later, but just as
an author will sometimes have to ask "should I re-write the manuscript" this
decision is one that can *only* be made by someone who has read it.  And if you
cannot write code you are cedeing the most important decisions to those who can.

Its usually a bad idea to re-write
----------------------------------

The famous example (made so perhaps by Joel Spolsky) is Netscape, who decided to
take 5 years, lose almost all market share and the company, in order to re-write
their web browser.  They produced Mozilla, which in the end is winning the
battle, but destroyed Netscape in the process.

Other examples include


Examples situation - California COBOL rewrite, Netscape,
http://weblog.infoworld.com/fatalexception/archives/2008/08/californias_leg.html
joelonsoftware


However there is a caveat.  This is the "stop everything, have nothing
releaseable" approach.  There is a different approach, that of ensuring there is
a releaseable candidate available at all times.  This is the preferred approach
and


Is this a feasible research project?  What would the answer be how to break down
criteria? How much could be replaced / overlaid etc?  in fact its not too bad as
research.


Simple enough to fit in one brain
---------------------------------

On what criteria should we make these decisions.  My vote is a simple one - at
the point at which the system no longer fits neatly into one brain.

This is the limit of complexity - anything more complex and it really cannot be
used. Boeing is best example - there are one or two people in Boeing who
understand how the whole plane fits together. Every part. They may not be able
to tell you the spec of the left hand wing nut 145 but they can tell you that as
it is in the rear of the wing and is riveted at 2cm distances it must have a
sheering strength of ... let me think, 2.5 times 300Kg, yeah. 47.'

SOmeone who understands the system as a whole. Now if boeing decided to put
swing wing aircraft with sunroofs and MRI scanners then one person whoule not be
able to know enough fundamentals to keep it all in their head. and then there
would be no-one who could say 'hold on, that new idea just will not work'

There MUST be, for any single system, one person who understands it all - that
is, could recreate it, not from memory but from first principles - who in thoery
could sit down and say, well the architecture means I must have a wing light
enough to have this Hooks constant, which we decieed was aluminum alloy of X,
which means


This person should not be able to create it all himself - but should be able to
lay out the specs in enough detail that peers could create the parts and it
would all fit. This is the IT Manager - boeing chief engineer

Any higher up (in quotes) and that capability is not there, and so that person
should not make decisons about the system. They should and presumably do not
decisions about the policital system around that engineering project and this is
right - they are a politician.

I guess I am saying managers can only manage that which they can recreate from
memory and hold a working compelte model of in their head.

Its a tall order, but without it you can never decide if rewriting or duct tape
is the best option
 
