Contracting with the U.K. government.
-------------------------------------

"I have a dream ... to make my government better."

Government contracts.  Government Software Contracts. The phrase
conjures up images of bribery, corruption, fat profits for next no
work. I am of course hoping this is all true. But for the moment if
you talk about software in government, you have to talk about GDS.


GDS and "the preference"
------------------------

Way back when, Liam Maxwell was a well respected IT consultant and one
day he wrote a small paper that basically said "If the UK government
applied industry best practises in developing software, and switched
to Open Source Software to stop getting ripped off, they could save
eight billion a year".

For some reason the ca-ching sound of Â£8 bn reached the ears of
then-Tory Cabinet Office Minister Francis Maude, who replied with
"Well, go on then".  So Liam helped set up GDS which then set about
changing UK government's approach to software.  It hired people to
write new code for high profile new projects.  Things like the gov.uk
website, the new look DVLA and so forth.

They released their code on GitHub , they did things "Agile", and they
made a noise.  But one of the biggest noises was almost an accident.
You see they also produced service manuals. These are the Cabinet Office's
not-really-optional directions to the rest of government on how to buy
and develop software.  And the story goes that one of the more
progressive and leading Scrummasters was asked to put the finishing
touches to the manual and get it out there. And he wrote that
government should, when purchasing and developing software "have a
preference for" open source software.

It went out (you know - publish early and often).  And then his bosses
noticed that *policy* had just been made.  Big policy, policy that
affects the billions of pounds spent each year.  But also policy that
is exactly why the GDS existed.

So they went into a room, shut the door and discussed it. Came out for
some strong coffee and went back in.  Then came out again, and said,
"Yeah OK. Leave it. It's policy now".

I want to emphasise just what an impact this had.  I was just software
entrepreneur working for a University in Texas ('cos they
were the only people I could find who would pay me to write open source
software. Writing free software in the UK for pay ... well, I despaired of my
government getting it.)

And suddenly there was the Cabinet Office, Sir Humphrey himself,
saying Open Source is the way to go.

It was electric. The very next day I had bought my ticket to a local
government conference and I went around expounding to everyone there
who would listen, trying to set up pilot projects and so on (see
http://www.oss4gov.org).

The industry papers were crazy for this, this was real policy and it
mattered that we were going to go in the right direction for once.

And it meant that there could be a dream - it *might* be worth working
for the government.  Instead of working for Texas, I could work for
Whitehall. I could build software that solves real world problems -
and solve them once for the UK. And if they worked for Uzbekistan or
United Arab Emirates as well, great.  It is a big dream after all.

The Dream
---------

You see while we all moan and gripe and make fun of bureaucracy, the
vast majority of government services are pointing in the right
direction.  They make lives better for most people, protect those who
are most vulnerable and essentially pick up the pieces.  It does not
always work right, often badly done, underfunded and over-subscribed
but in the end most public servants take pride in doing the right
thing and going in the right direction.

If you look at `LGSL list <http://oss4gov.org/lgsl>`_, you can see
over 2000 statutory services - the vast majority of which either have
to be digital, or are going to benefit greatly from going digital.
Services that government *must* legally supply, and services that can
be done better faster digitally.  And why should that be proprietary?
(the demand for software to help Returning Officers to organise
Polling booths is sky high amoungst international banks and hedge
funds).

I rant on about this in the `OSS4Gov manifesto. <http://www.oss4gov.org/manifesto>`_

So as I said, I started a campaign website, headed off to LGA
Conference and glad-handed anyone who would listen, paid for a big
breakfast bash (visitors - none) and ... Nothing happened.

Was I dejected? Was I down heartend? Yes actually.  And well out of
pocket for sponsoring lame breakfasts.

But the dream is still there.

It's because in the digital age, when you are doing socially
beneficial work, why in hell's name should you have to fight crappy
software to get the job done.  Shouldn't you get the best software
globally possible to do your job, and shouldn't I as a taxpayer get
the best deal possible?  And more than that, it matters in another
way.

In the (excellent, go read it) book "Red Platoon", Medal of Honor
winner Clinton Romesha describes fighting off a massive Taliban attack
on his camp in Afghanistan.  The USAF squadron who supported him had a
sign above the mess door -"The mission is a 19 year old with a
rifle.  Everything else is support."

Whilst not taking away anything from that sentiment, I want to steal
it to underline why I think OSS in government actually matters - ::

    "The mission is a nurse with a bedpan 
     Everything else will be DevOps"

I want to spend the next decade building open source software that
makes people's lives better, doing it slowly, correctly, and spreading
it out over countries that really could do with good digital
government services but have no hope of affording it.  I mean once
California pays for a social worker case management system, what is
needed is good devs in each country to manage the localisation and
... Everyone wins.

So, how hard can it be to get one of these open source contracts.  I
mean I am a professional so *doing the work* is not a problem.  How
hard can someone letting me do the work be?

Turns out pretty darn difficult.  Despite the GDS wanting people like
me, and me wanting to do the work, its still a challenge.

That's the story for part 2.
